Yes.
Yeah, it's Zoom. Yes. Yeah.
Good morning. So now
we are moving into public session.
Is
Zara there online now?
Yeah,
I don't think it is.
It wasn't supposed to. Zan, can you please accept
that invite to become a
panelist if you can.
Hopefully Zan can hear me. Zans not accepting.
Okay, Brett,
look at this.
There was ring.
Hello Brett, I can see your name on the screen.
Can you please turn your, um, microphone
and video on if you like to.
Oh, thank you so much. Now we can see you. Can you hear me?
Yes. Oh, great. We can hear you as well.
Thank you so much, Brett. We have five minutes with you
and this is your time.
So, uh, if you would like to speak
to your submission, uh, that's good.
And if there is any time left,
there might be some questions from members. Thank you.
Thank you for your time. Uh, my name is Brett Murphy.
I used to work for Newshub in the Australian Press
Association, and I'm here to, here to oppose this bill
that will erode the privacy of New Zealand citizens
and what I call another example
of government overreach and censorship.
Proposed changes could significantly affect
how we communicate online, particularly
with encrypted services
and overseas providers are concerned.
The bill would extend New Zealand's regulatory regime
to overseas based providers, such as messaging apps
and satellite services, requiring them to comply
with local interception rules.
The changes would apply
to familiar services New Zealanders use every day, including
WhatsApp, signal, telegram, and satellite providers.
Like starlink, end-to-end encryption isn't a niche
technical feature.
It's how journalists protect sources,
how whistleblowers come forward,
and how ordinary people speak freely
without fear of surveillance.
Bill would require overseas providers to ensure
in depth capability, even for encrypted communications that
raises serious questions about whether genuine private
communication would remain available in New Zealand.
The bill also introduces a new enforcement power,
allowing the Secretary of the Ministry
for Business Innovation and Employment to suspend
or revoke licenses.
If providers do not comply with regulatory requirements,
that power effectively gives a government official the
ability to switch off a
communication service in New Zealand.
Once that infrastructure exists,
it can be repurposed in ways Parliament may
not currently intend.
I wonder if the committee is familiar with Paval Roux,
the founder and CE of Social Men Messaging App Telegram.
His app has around 1 billion users worldwide
with a focus on privacy.
He was arrested in France in 2024 before being released.
Six months later, he was detained on suspicion of failing
to take action to curb with the alleged criminal use
of his platform and was eventually charged with 12 offenses.
Pavel denied all the charges against him describing his
arrest as legally and logically absurd,
and saying investigators were struggling to find anything
that I or Telegram did wrong.
The cynic in me would suggest his arrest was
because his platform could not be monitored
or controlled and highlights.
Another example of government overreach like we
witnessed during COVID-19.
He was in the newspaper again this week
and I will now read some quotes from the Guardian newspaper.
Spain has accused Pavo Vero of spreading lies
and seeking to undermine democratic institutions.
After the Telegram, founder used his messaging app
to attack government plans to introduce a social media ban
for under sixteens and to hold tech,
the companies responsible for hateful
and harmful content to Ros public intervention,
which came a day after Elon Musk called Spain's prime
minister Pedro Sanchez.
A true fascist totalitarian
over the proposed measures reveals the rapid escalating
tensions between governments
and powerful global technological chiefs,
and a blanket message sent to all telegram users of Spain.
The Russian entrepreneur accused Sanchez's government are
pushing dangerous new regulations
that threaten your internet freedoms.
Adding that the measures could turn Spain into a
surveillance state under the guise to protection Dero claim.
The mandatory aid verification contained in the proposed
legislations with set a precedent
for tracking every user's identity, eroding anonymity
and opening doors to mass data collection.
He also said that holding tech executives liable
for illegal, hateful,
or harmful content would encourage over censorship
and lead platforms to delete
anything remotely controversial.
To avoid risks silencing, political dissent, journalism,
and everyday opinions,
Spanish government sources hit back saying Deros
unprecedented message to millions of users was designed
to ERO trust in institutions
and demonstrated the need for social media
and mobile messaging apps to be regulated.
I would respectfully suggest to the Spanish government
to stop invading your citizen's privacy
like this bill threatens to do here in New Zealand.
I wonder if the committee is familiar
with Elon Musk's battle with Australia's eaf commissioner.
The Safety Commissioner was forced
to drop a legal case against x to have footage
of a stabbing removed that went global in 2024.
The reason this footage appears to be targeted is
because it shows a Muslim terrorist attempting to stab
to death a Christian leader in his own church,
which resulted in the victim losing an eye.
The question is, is this really about removing hate speech
and harmful online content
or stopping speech that people hate
or criticism of governments?
People are pushing back around the world.
As you know, the previous government's hate speech laws
were soundly rejected.
Labor has been forced to backtrack from its compulsory
digital ID in Britain.
The Australia's labor government will not likely survive the
backlash after introducing a variety
of unpopular policies like banning under sixteens from
social media, which Spain is attempting to do right now.
I would suggest now is a good time
to turn back from the insanity before Elon and Pavel decide.
New Zealand needs to be woken up
regarding freedoms we look set
to lose if this bill is approved, thank you for your time
and consideration and as a former journalist ask you please
respect the freedom of the press
and the individual's right to privacy. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Brett.
You timed it really well. Thank you so much.
Have a great day. Take care.
Bye-bye. Bye-bye.
Still up? Yeah,
sorry.
We couldn't, we Okay.
Oh, uh, Roy, can you hear me?
Yes, I can. Oh, okay, great.
So can you please, um, have you accepted to be a panelist?
Yes, I have. Uh, madam.
Oh, great. Okay.
So, um, and if you would like to just speak that's fine.
Yeah. And start you, um, speaking to your submission.
Good morning ladies and thank you, uh, Dr. Parmar.
So I'm like, in my submission, I totally oppose the bill
because under the, under the guise of fixing some anomalies,
I think it will severely restrict, uh, Kiwi freedom
of speech and allowed the government to dramatically censor
and promote their own view.
I think, uh, in this country, right from inception, freedom
of expression, freedom of, uh,
opinion has been a cornerstone, uh, of,
of this great country.
And, uh, under the guise
of fixing some lacuna in the present legislation,
that there is so much overreach in this bill
that it would cause severe, uh,
quite draconian free speech erosion in this whole country.
It also would, uh, result in the expansion of surveillance
and enforcement powers.
Uh, while these are aimed at offshore providers,
it could, uh, result in denial of service from these,
uh, offshore providers.
If they do not want to comply with the provisions
of this bill, this would cause a further
isolation of New Zealand.
And, uh, the end,
end-to-end inscription is essential infrastructure
that protects journalists
and their sources, whistleblowers victims,
and people who are being, who,
who are suffering injustice to speak out.
So I would, uh, it would also interfere with, uh,
um, you know, kis engaging in free exp in, uh,
private communication among themselves.
So for these reasons, I recommend the bill not proceed in
its current form, and it has to be substantially amended
to address the concerns lined, outlined above.
That's all I have to say, madam.
Oh, thank you Roy. Uh, are there any questions?
Yes, there is a question from, uh, Dr. David Wilson.
Uh, we are speaking to Roy,
Aren't we? Yep. Roy Menzies.
Yes, you are. Okay, thank you Roy.
Um, under the expansion of surveillance
and enforcement powers, you mentioned that, uh, uh,
the powers restrict
or revoke licenses
where court based enforcement is deemed impractical.
Can you explain what you think a narrowing
of those powers would look like in your view?
Sure. I think we have to be part of the global community
bringing New Zealand into a little bit of island where the,
where the government has a lot of power
and it also hands power to unelected bureaucrats to, to, uh,
to make changes to the New Zealand side, which is,
which will not have to go through parliament.
I'm, I would certainly be strongly opposed to that.
So you, you mentioned that you, um, you saw a way
of narrowing those powers
and maintaining privacy on one hand
and public interest on the other.
Um, do you have a view of what that would be
and what that would look like?
I don't have at this point, uh,
have had enough involvement
and knowledge to come up with a solution,
but all I can see is the bill in its present form could have
a very adverse impact
on kis the freedom of expression.
It could also force foreign provider, foreign providers
who choose not to, uh, go along with this,
to restrict new kiwi's access
to the global communication system.
So, so I think the bill has to be, uh,
redrafted in a very substantial way.
Thank you, Roy. Okay. Thank
You sir.
Thank you Roy. Thank you for your submission.
Thank you, Ms. Palm. Okay, thanks.
Have a good day. Bye-bye.
Thank you. Uh, who do we have next?
Okay.
Hello. Can you hear me now?
Yes. Siron, we can hear you but we can't see you.
But, um, if you wish to turn your video on,
um, otherwise you can just start,
um, speaking to your submission.
That's totally fine. It's your time.
Do we have five minutes with you? Uh, this time? Time.
And any questions from members if
there will be any time left. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair
and members of the committee, thank you
for the opportunity to speak.
I want to be clear at the outset.
Regulatory clarity and digital environment is legitimate.
Ensuring overseas providers are subject
to New Zealand law is a reasonable objective.
However, this bill materially expands state enforcement
power in ways that without strong safeguards creates civil
liberties and market confidence risks.
My submission focuses on three issues.
One, interception capability
and decryption, two license revocation
as an enforcement weapon.
Three, due process
and proportion proportionality,
one interception capability and encryption.
The bill expands the territorial scope
of the telecommunications act so that overseas providers
and network operators are clearly subject
to interception obligations,
even though the bill does not explicitly mandate weakening
encrypt encryption.
The practical reality is this,
when interception compliance is backed
by strong enforcement sanctions,
providers whose systems rely on strict end-to-end encryption
may face structural pressure to redesign their systems.
Strong encryption is not optional technology.
It protects ordinary new Zealand's new citizens from cyber
crime businesses, from commercial espionage lawyers
and journalists, from breaches of confidentiality,
families from identity theft.
If regulatory uncertainty leads
to weakened encryption architecture,
or if providers withdraw secure services from the
New Zealand market, new Zealanders are less
safe, not more safe.
This bill should therefore include an explicit clause
stating that compliance mechanisms must not require systemic
vulnerabilities or general weakening
of end-to-end encryption That would provide clarity without
obstructing lawful interception under proper authority.
Two, license revocation and restriction powers.
The new part seven. A enforcement regime allows the
secretary to revoke or permanently restrict radio
and spectrum licenses where there is serious non-compliance.
This is not a MI minor sanction
spectrum access is foundational
to telecommunications operations.
The bill also allows enforcement consequences to flow
through to licenses held
by third parties if provider relies on them.
That means regulatory action against one entity may affect
intermediaries and end users.
When interception compliance is linked to the potential loss
of spectrum rights, the leverage is significant
without a clearly articulated proportionality framework
on the face of the act.
The risk is that license revocation becomes a blunt
compliance tool rather than a last resort.
If revocation is available, it must be clearly structured
as one necessary.
Two. Proportionate three demonstrably the least
intrusive option available.
Those requirements should not be implied.
They should be explicit.
Three due process and evidential standards.
The bill permits the secretary
to rely solely on summary information
provided by surveillance agencies when considering
enforcement action,
where the sanction may include revocation
or permanent restriction of spectrum licenses.
That evidential threshold is low. This creates two risks.
First, a due process risk for providers.
Second, a confidence risk for the broader market.
Severe regulatory sanctions require strong procedural
safeguards for revocation
or permanent restriction decisions.
The bill should require a higher evidential standard than
summary material alone.
Clear recorded reasoning addressing proportionality
and structured consideration
of downstream impact on New Zealand customers.
That is not an obstruction. It is good regulatory design.
Four, offshore provider confidence.
The bill's purpose is
to ensure overseas providers are subject to New Zealand law.
However, New Zealand is a small market.
If compliance risk is uncertain, technically incompatible
with certain encryption models
or tied to severe discretionary enforcement powers,
providers may choose to limit services here.
The result would be, would not be improved sovereignty.
It would be reduced service availability
and potentially reduced cybersecurity resilience.
Clear statutory safeguards reduce
that risk while preserving enforcement capability.
Conclusion, this bill shifts power that may be justified,
but when power shifts,
safeguards must strengthen accordingly.
I recommended the committee amend the bill to include
an explicit non weakening of encryption safeguard.
A statutory proportionality
and least intrusive means test for license sanctions,
stronger evidential requirements for vocational
or permanent restriction, clear protection of third party
and end user interests.
Limited transparency reporting on use
of these new enforcement powers.
With those amendments, the bill can achieve its policy
objective without undermining civil liberties,
cybersecurity, or market confidence.
Thank you.
Thank you Zoran.
Um, that's all the time we had
for your submission. Thank you.
You're welcome. Contribution. Have a good day. Bye-bye.
A good day. Bye. Looking
for the next summit, Wayne?
Yeah, on Zoom. Hello Wayne. How are you?
I'm good, thank you. Good morning.
Thank you. Um, thank you for your submission.
We have five minutes, uh, for your submission.
This includes if there will be any time left
after you have spoken to your submission.
Uh, and, and if there are any questions from members.
Sure. Thank you. Okay. So good morning.
My name is Wayne Wooderson
and this is my submission to the select committee.
Today, the tele communications
and other amendments, uh,
other matters amendment bill significantly changes
how New Zealand telecommunications laws apply
to overseas service providers.
It reflects a general consensus
that overseas providers operating in New Zealand in the
New Zealand market should be subject
to comparable regulatory obligations as local operators.
This seems reasonable, however,
both the Law Society Law Association
and the Free Speech Union have highlighted in their
submissions that the bill in its present form
will do more harm than good.
If passed, yes,
it will close the jurisdictional gap highlighted
by the Commerce Commission versus Cordia Group limited case,
but it will introduce the raft of other problems due
to its wide extraterritorial reach,
complex enforcement mechanisms,
broad administrative discretion,
and unchecked ministerial powers.
If the spell is genuinely concerned about protecting persons
in New Zealand, then it needs
to address its current limitations
and potential dangers for the future.
The FCU Law Society
and Law Association have done a thorough job in
outlining these to the committee.
So I won't repeat them here this morning.
However, as someone the bill is seeking to protect, here is
what I feel needs to change.
Firstly, drop the idea
that some service providers are too essential to sanction.
This limits effective consumer protection
and undermines any service integrity within the sector.
Providers, all providers need to face some form
of sanction if there is a breach
because no one is above the law.
What this will look like will need to be carefully thought
through and developed.
Secondly, protect private communications from New Zealand
surveillance agencies by amending section ten four
of the telecommunications intersection Capability
and Security Act 2013, whatever the future
of encryption will be.
New Zealanders have a right, a right
to private encrypted communications without network
operators and service providers building back doors
or decrypting communications when they do not possess
the decryption keys they need.
Thirdly, limit surveillance capacity of present
and future laws by amending section five
of the Telecommunications Act to ensure
that retail quality service matters
focus on technical delivery rather than editorial
or content related matters.
As the FCU has pointed out, this will ensure
that the government cannot administratively regulate pre
speech without new primary legislation.
Which leads me to a concern about the range
of powers the secretary has under the spill at present,
along with the Commerce Commission
and future New Zealand surveillance agencies
and the capital, capital intensive sector like
telecommunications that relies on predictability.
Is the ability to revoke, suspend, or restrict radio
and spectrum licenses really the best response
to alleged breaches
or for the industry to be met
with new obligations without the need
for new primary legislation?
The reality is, is
that the regulatory framework proposed under the bill,
it's designed to be adaptable over time.
Retail service quality is currently limited to billing
and service standards.
However, there is nothing in this bill at present
to stop content moderation
and platform governance becoming a service requirement
or for the Commerce Commission to mandate mandate
Industry codes related to each of these.
Also, there are no checks
and balances on the power used by surveillance agencies.
With this in mind, I'd like to see the recommendations made
by the FCU to be included to ensure that the Secretary
Commerce Commission and New Zealand surveillance agencies
are held accountable under the bill.
Finally, I'd like to recommend in light of this,
that a yearly board be required under the bill for the
above actors to ensure the ongoing transparency
and accountability of the government
and the telecommunication sector.
I think this would for me bring peace of mind
as a member of the public.
If the telecommunications
and other amendments built is really
for protecting persons in New Zealand, then in my opinion
as a New Zealander, it needs
to address the concerns highlighted in the submissions
provided by the Law Society Law Association, FCU
and previous, um, attendees like myself,
of which my submission is touched on today.
So thank you for your time and God bless.
Thank you so much. Uh, any questions We have,
um, just 30 seconds.
Very quick question. No, that's all good.
Thank you so much, Wayne, for your contribution.
You are welcome. Thank you. Bye.
Um, next we have, we, we don't have it here, Paul.
Oh, Paul. Hello. Hi. Good morning. Hi.
Uh, thank you so much, uh, for coming here in person,
uh, for your submission.
We have five minutes with you. Yep.
And you've seen how it works. Thank you. Yep.
No, thank you. Thanks for allowing me to speak.
Um, I just wanna being, having been the victim
of excessive surveillance many years ago, I wish
to tell you what can go wrong.
So I'll go back to 1979.
I was working as a tour maker for Phillips
and Nine Eye with a general strike called
by the engineering union, which I didn't,
which I broke single handedly.
That's me. Um,
and in those days we had compulsory trade unionism.
So anyhow, that didn't go down well,
but I didn't get attacked or beaten
up 'cause that used to happen.
Sorry. But it did. Anyhow, I decided to appeal
to be a conscientious objector.
You're allowed to. So I got a lawyer friend of mine,
Peter Richardson from Upper Hut retired,
and we went to the, a week before the tribunal case.
He rings me up very excited that, uh, Mr.
Mcwe in the top QC in the, in the country, one
of the top three at that time and 79 wanted
to do the case pro bono
because I fired the balls
to take on the trade union movement.
I needed help. So anyhow, we, um, went to the,
to the hearing and, um, that that was fine.
And I got a chance
to cross examine the trade union guy briefly.
And because I'd been to Russia once in 75
as a drive through tourist.
And secondly, in 19, in 76 as the first mountaineer
to climb in Russia from New Zealand
for, since the revolution.
I got a good look at the inside of communism for the elite,
with the elite corruption at its highest, highest levels.
Then anyhow, um,
we had the hearing here in the building in parliament
up the hill, up the hill there.
And I got a chance to cross examine the trade union guy.
And I ripped into him, I'll be quite blunt,
didn't take a lot of prisoners.
Um, then I felt both lawyers kicking me under the table.
The only hell we adjourned anyhow,
made my submission to them.
I asked lawyers, I remember that McGwen was one
of the top three QCs in the country at the time.
Why? What I did, what I had, why, what I,
why would they kick me under the table?
You destroyed the trade union thing.
Anyhow, I was found to have no sincerity of belief
and, um, my case
for being a conscious subjector was rejected.
Anyhow, we fast forward to the end of 79
and a friend of mine, Dr.
Featherston, who now resides in America
and myself, held a party at his house in Alah.
And that was fine.
I'd done the sing as you didn't in those days.
Ring 'em up, you wanna come to a party
and a Christmas party, two, three before Christmas.
All those things were all very friendly. Well, good, fine.
So I'm out the back Saturday night, mid-December 79,
helping John do a few things.
And one of my friends comes out
and says, oh, Paul says there's a hot chick looking for you.
Well, I've never considered myself chick
ba sorry, not been rude here.
And so I go out and, um, there was an attractive woman.
I was 29 at the time about,
I'd say about roughly about the same age.
And, um, I thought, this is weird.
I don't even know this woman. Why is she here?
I didn't invite her. So this goes back
to surveillance unauthorized effectively.
'cause I was seen as a danger to the country.
And, um, I said, well, you, I'm Paul, hi.
I gather you wanna have a yarn trying to be friendly.
And then she flawed me. She said, Paul, you are Mr. Clark.
Yes, fine. I am here on behalf
of the New Zealand government.
To tell you personally, on behalf
of the New Zealand government, the government, Mr.
Moderno was prime minister, will not allow you
to destroy the trade union movement.
And the thing about it, that spider on me,
Kate crashed a party effectively.
'cause I had a contrary belief.
I didn't believe in trade unionism.
And I made a few flippant remarks about trade unionism.
Sorry, that's me. And I said, well,
can we have a glass of wine and discuss it?
Anyhow, so I turned around to get the wine and she goes,
and anyhow, um, people said,
oh God, you upset here pretty quickly.
Or I didn't go into it with anybody that night. Fine.
On the Monday I rang my two lawyers, Peter Richardson,
who's retired now here in Upper Hut, and told him,
and he was like, holy crap, that's ridiculous.
And then I rang McGwen
and he just recently retired a couple of years ago as um,
head of the appeals court here in New Zealand.
And I told him twice, he, he hung up on me.
And on the third time he heard me out
and he said, Paul, you've won, if the government feels
so threatened by what you did, um, I was seen as a front
for the employers federation.
I wasn't, I just a totally independent guy.
And this is where surveillance can go wrong so easily.
I had done nothing wrong. I had not broken any laws,
and yet I get effectively raided for my beliefs,
which were totally legal.
There was no law that said you had
to believe in trade unionism.
So I just wanna tell you what happens when you get overreach
with no accountability.
And the funny thing was, four years later,
all compulsory trade unionism went, uh, I like
to think demons of this day.
I had a part in that. That's just my own personal beliefs.
But what I'm trying to say here is, it's all all very nice
to have all these surveillance rules,
but it's also often people involved
with them are not accountable or not held to account.
And unless you're very strong
and luckily I've, I are a fairly strong person in
that sense, you don't get the pushback
that really justice requires.
Um, thank you Paul, for your submission.
We have run of the Yeah.
Oh, sorry about that. For Your submission.
That's just five minutes. Thank you so much. Yep.
Is there any questions or anything?
Okay, thank you. Okay, Thanks. Bye. Thank, thank you.
Thank you. Um,
next we have Erica.
Erica, can you as accept to be a panelist? Oh, sorry.
No, this is the next subject. Oh, sorry.
Sorry about that. Well, thank
you for Yeah, I can see you.
You now Erica. Thank you. Can you hear me?
Yes. Isn't technology great?
Good. Um, so we have five minutes with you.
Um, this includes, um, any questions, um,
after you have spoken to your submission,
if there is any time left.
Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you member. My name is Erica Whitham.
I about me, I have a Bachelor
of Arts degree from the University of Toronto
at my time in Toronto.
I studied one year in former East Berlin
in the nineties at Hobart University.
I've worked in it in New Zealand since 2002
in private and government sector.
So that's just a bit about me.
Just bill the telecommunications
and other matters amendment bill.
Um, it's really concerns me gravely
because this bill violates freedom of speech, freedom
of expression, freedom of association, freedom
of information and respect for human rights,
which is written in our 1990 bill of Rights.
I support the submissions from the Free Speech Union.
I heard Sue Gray's submissions with her academic,
um, person who accompanied her.
And this bill really is overreach.
I agree with what the former gentleman was just saying
before me about the former overreach
of the Eastern eastern block.
Um, encryption is essential infrastructure
for private security and free expression.
Um, I, my submission is that the commission needs
to amend this bill or not have it proceed.
There needs to be encryption, sorry.
The, this regulation, um, gives the mechanism to shut down
non-compliant platforms.
And what I find most concerning
is section, I think it's section 50,
uh, just be with me, 65 i sharing of information
and, um, documents.
As I said in Berlin, I studied, one
of my lecturers told me all mail was opened
by the secret police by the Chaz.
All overseas mail was opened, read and sealed back up.
Sometimes her mail arrived and it was a block of glue
because they'd used so much glue to seal it back up.
But she couldn't even read it.
You know, she just had this, this brick, this section
about in the bill about sharing of information and documents
and a surveillance agency.
This is really, really concerning.
Um, I'm trying to think of the society where surveillance
and censorship has done it well.
Uh, I can't think of any examples as, as the guy
before me was talking about, you know, former Eastern, um,
block countries in their surveillance,
it didn't turn out well for them.
There's the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights.
Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression.
This right includes freedom
to hold opinions without interference, to seek, receive
and impart information
and ideas through any media regardless of frontier.
So any media is the take home for me on that one.
Um, you know,
people in former eastern block countries, if their radio
or TV aerials were facing West, you know,
meaning they were listening to the BBC, they had the Shazi
or the KGB at their house interrogating them
and they lost their jobs and they were given a job.
They didn't recognize their skills.
This is not what we want in New Zealand.
You know, we have a democracy.
Um, any kind of surveillance agency, um,
is not part of a democracy.
I'd like to talk about the US case in 2022.
That was the state of Missouri versus Joe Biden.
This was the Attorney General of the state
of Missouri, Eric Schmidt.
And he took a case against the White House
for censorship censorship on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
YouTube, uh, LinkedIn.
And under the First Amendment, one of the decisions was
that the federal government should have no role in policing
private speech or picking winners
and losers in the marketplace of ideas.
That case went on
and resulted in Mark Zuckerberg
being questioned in Congress.
And then he's since backed down on, uh,
he issued a written apology after being questioned.
So I don't think the internet should be turned
into some sort of cleaned up version of the Yellow Pages.
'cause that's what this bill is gonna ultimately result in.
You know, the internet is about free, free speech
and we live in a democracy.
We don't live in an oligarchy
and we live in the age of enlightenment.
That's where information is shared.
I know the former PM Arder talked about
the one source of truth.
Um, this is the sort of thing
that happened in the dark ages.
You know, there was an academic Galileo Galileo
who was shut down per saying the Earth was not the center
of the solar system by the Catholic church in,
in our century of the internet, sorry, of communications.
We embrace information. Sorry.
Sorry to interrupt Erica. Uh, we have run out of time.
So thank you so much for your submission.
Thank you for your contribution.
Okay, thank you. Thank you. Bye-bye.
Scott, can you hear me?
Uh, yes. Oh, great. Thank you so much.
Uh, we can see you, but we can hear you.
That's totally fine. So we have five
minutes with you. Thank you.
Okay. Uh, thank you for the opportunity to appear.
Um, in my written submission, I focused on infrastructure,
competition and regulatory architecture.
I'd like to briefly expand on structural implications, um,
of extending that architecture extra territorially.
First, I acknowledge, uh, acknowledge the policy problem.
Offshore telecommunications providers are increasingly
delivering services into New Zealand,
ensuring regulatory clarity
and a level of level playing field is reasonable.
The regulatory gap is real.
My concern is not the objective, it's the design choice.
The bill addresses the gap primarily
by extending the extraterritorial scope
of existing obligations
and strengthening enforcing enforcement mechanisms,
including spectrum based leverage,
where traditional enforcement may be impractical.
That approach preserves the existing regulatory paradigm.
It does not reexamine it.
When legislation expands enforcement reach without bending
balancing architecture alongside it.
It creates what might be described best
as a path of dependence.
Institutions naturally operate within
the tools they are given.
Over time, regulatory effort, compliance, cost,
and enforcement dynamics can become self-reinforcing.
The regulatory impact statement acknowledges
that outcomes will depend significantly on compliance levels
and regulatory effort.
That is understandable, but it also highlights
that enforcement is likely
to require ongoing institutional energy
and may not always succeed.
That makes clarity around scope
and proportionality even more important, the new power
to revoke or restrict radio spectrum licenses
is a significant lever.
It may, may be justified as backstop.
However, spectrum is not merely a technical resource.
It is an economic one.
When enforcement relies on economic choke points,
it can shape markets indirectly.
If the underlying policy objective includes infrastructure
protection or market stabilization,
it would strengthen legitimacy to state that explicitly
and debate proportionality transparently.
Um, there is also a perimeter question.
New Zealand's search surveillance
and inception frameworks evolved within a domestic
constitutional and cultural environment.
Judicial oversight prosecutor, uh, prosecution standards
and informal accountability.
Accountability norms form part of their ecosystem.
As telecommunications obligations become
explicitly extraterritorial infrastructure providers
operating offshore are effectively brought into
that domestic enforcement architecture.
It is worth considering whether the visibility of safeguards
scales appropriately with that expansion.
That leads to a broader point about
transparency and accountability.
If TSA is increasingly operating as part
of New Zealand's outward facing regulatory posture,
then strengthening the visibility
of its balancing principles would enhance legitimacy both
domestically and internationally.
This does not require weakening lawful
interception capability.
It may simply require clearer articulation
of proportionality review mechanisms
and constitutional content within the
statutory framework itself.
Finally, telecommunication systems are inherently dual use.
The same architectures that enable lawful access
can also be designed to strengthen privacy protections.
Legislative signals matter
because they shape the architectural incentives.
If enforcement mechanisms are being expanded,
extra territorially, that may be prudent to ensure
that incentives towards privacy preserving design
are equally visible within the framework.
In short, the regulatory gap is real
equal treatment cross providers is reasonable,
but as a perimeter of enforcement expands,
embedding explicit balancing architecture will strength,
durability, legitimacy, and long-term trust.
Thank you.
Thank you for your submission. Any questions for members?
No, thank you so much, uh, for your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks Carl. We don't have marks.
Glen. Yeah,
Glen, can you hear me?
Not yet.
Great. Uh, thank you so much Glen for your submission.
We have five minutes with you
and this includes, um, time
for any questions if there is any time left
after you have spoken to your submission. Thank you.
Yeah, thank you very much. And, um, I, I do wanna
I guess give an apology up front.
I've been running around, um, but crazily this morning.
So, um, realize I didn't actually have a copy
of the submission to hand,
but, so I'll just be winging it a little bit
and I apologize for that.
But, um, I guess the, the gist of of my submission was that
I have concerns around this bill
and it's probably the kind
of concerns I imagine you've heard from a number
of submitters.
And I guess to sort of summarize them, I, you know, having,
having read through it, a friend of mine sort
of notified me about it.
Um, and I had a look at the time,
and to me, this, this is something that's sort of presented
as kind of, you know, almost technical amendments to things.
But I see it as quite a big policy shift
and it changes, um, to my mind significantly,
the expansion of this country's surveillance regime
and, um, extending those interception powers
to cover overseas communication services is, is quite a,
quite a notable shift, um, in terms of the philosophy
behind it, but also the practical implications.
So that's, I guess summing up my view would be that the,
the, the fundamental sort of civil liberties
that we all value, um, needs a lot more scrutiny
than the public have, have really given this bill so far.
And, and I, you know, I urge you all to,
to really work through that.
Um, I guess specifically I think the bill risks,
um, the whole basis of, of modern communication systems
where you, which allow for freedom of expression and,
and all kinds of societies around the world.
And I think it's easy to sort of just go, well,
we're okay here, so we'll just do this here,
but just, just look at the scalability of this
and to look at the impacts on end-to-end encryption.
You know, I, the way I sort of see it is that either
these commun global communication providers are gonna have
to tam with that technology and have impacts globally,
or they're gonna have to limit
or withdraw their services in the New Zealand market.
And, and either way, you know, I just look at,
look at why we are going down this track when the
implications in a lot of countries for doing this would be
incredibly severe.
And I think it's easy, like a lot of things to do
with free speech, it's easy to sort of go, well,
it's not a big deal here
until it is a big deal here one day.
Um, and I think when you look at people like journalists
who are needing to protect sources, whistleblowers, people
who just wanna speak out politically
and sort of organize themselves in an environment
that sometimes can be quite, um,
restrictive in modern society.
Um, people who, who, who are from vulnerable communities,
people who are, um, minority groups who,
and you know, you can go back through New Zealand's history
and see there are times whatever group it is,
whether it it be, um, the, the um,
gay lesbian community back in, in the time who,
who would be under severe threat in a modern society if we
transpose what they were dealing
with politically at the time to a modern
communication system
because that's how people communicate these days.
So to sort of, to, to think that it's sort
of maybe untoward actors all the time
who are utilizing this, I think misses the key point
that there is a free speech component
and there is a genuine, um, need for people to be able to
have, uh, privacy in their communications.
Um, and the other thing I guess for me that it seems
somewhat significant is, is this what, you know,
people are calling the kill switch that, um,
feature governments can sort of expand this, can, you know,
shut down non-compliant platforms and and so forth.
And I, I just think that the, you know, I have to ask,
you know, what is, what are we really
trying to achieve here?
And is this the right way to approach it?
So to me, there need to be, there needs
to be amendments to the bill.
Um, there needs to be an understanding
of why encryption is important, um, why, um, there needs
to be a better balance between surveillance powers
and safeguards for people's privacy.
And I think ideally there needs to be a,
a proactive approach to, to more public, um,
debate about this because it is, it is a, you know, we're
between a rock and a hard place nowadays with the type
of society we have and, and social media.
But I think we really need to think a few times more
before we actually push any buttons on this one.
So that, that's sort of my summary.
Um, happy if there is time for any question.
Yes, thank you. Actually, we don't have any time left.
That's all right. Much for your submission. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, so, um, it's 8 55.
Yeah, we, that's the, we don't have, uh, so all right.
So members, I suspend the meeting until 1:00 PM.